登基ascend the throne
结成连理marry sb
白首到老remain by his side as long as I live
保佑grant sb the blessing
请脉check up on one's family
进香offer incense
独善其身preserve one's good name
尽孝perform my filial duty
中选be summoned
撂牌子be passed over
留牌子be selected
赐花bestow the flower
赐香囊bestow the sachet
跪下磕头请罪bow down and beg for forgiveness
跪On your knees
三思think twice
参见皇上bow in respect before His Majesty
辜负美意may not be able to repay kindness
行叩拜大礼perform the formal salutation
侍寝serve His Majesty in bed
怕拘束do not like formality
失言a slip of the tongue
勒死： be strangled
用茶： have tea with sb 
打听：make inquiries
严刑逼供： torture you to force a confession 
赏： rewards 
请脉：check on you daily
拖出去打死：be dragged away and beaten to death 
回禀： reform /report 
用膳：dine 
赐宴赏菜： grant you a feast 
失礼：discourteous
切勿怪罪： do not hold it against me 
有劳： trouble sb 
抗旨： defy the order 
撕破脸： offend sb openly 
从轻发落： give a mild punishment 
领命： as you wish 
皇上皇后起驾His Imperial Majesty and Her Highness the Empress depart
恭送We see you off in respect
奴才给莞嫔娘娘请安 I bow in respect before Concubine Wan
下旨Issue an imperial decree
接旨receive the imperial decree
封。。。Grant you the rank of
停轿Halt
给…请安Greetings
杖毙Be flogged to death
自宫Castrate oneself
起轿Depart
叩首：bow，起：rise
起灵：move the coffin
﻿ascend the throne 登基
marry sb 结成连理
remain by his side as long as I live 白首到老
grant sb the blessing 保佑
check up on one's family  请脉
offer incense 进香
preserve one's good name 独善其身
perform my filial duty 尽孝
be summoned 中选
be passed over 撂牌子
be selected 留牌子
bestow the flower 赐花
bestow the sachet 赐香囊
bow down and beg for forgiveness 跪下磕头请罪
On your knees 跪
think twice 三思
bow in respect before His Majesty 参见皇上
may not be able to repay kindness 辜负美意
perform the formal salutation 行叩拜大礼
serve His Majesty in bed 侍寝
do not like formality 怕拘束
a slip of the tongue 失言﻿concubine  嫔妃
lady 小姐
His/Your Majesty 皇上
the Empress Dowager 太后
the Empress 皇后
His/Your Highness 太后
Queen Mother 皇额娘
Your Highness/my lady 娘娘
Young mistresses 小主
I 臣妾
His Lordship 王爷
our 朕
the late Emperor 先皇﻿begonia 秋海棠
chrysanthemum 菊花
red plum 红梅
apricot 杏花﻿May blessing and peace be with you 愿皇上太后万福金安
May Your Majesty enjoy longlife and blessings. 愿皇上万岁万福
May Your Highness enjoy good health and peace. 愿太后祥康金安
May good fortune be with you. 皇上吉祥
I bow to Your Majesty. 给皇上请安
May our county thrive in peace. 愿大清国泰民安
Long live the Emperor. 万岁万岁万万岁
I wish you all blessings 万福﻿the whole family could rise up through one's success 鸡犬升天
much changes over time 变化无常
be kind and generous 宽宏大量
be granted an ordinary life when one can live an extraordinary one. 明珠暗投
make a display of one's eloquence 能说会道
know how to show gratitute 知恩图报
beauty of the nation 国色天香
clever toungues 口齿伶俐的人
swagger around 耀武扬威
receive more than I can repay 无以为报
vivid 栩栩如生
It is better to accept deferentially than to decline courteously. 恭敬不如从命
A fault confessed is half redressed 知错能改 善莫大焉
be torn in dilemma 进退两难
make up for mistake 将功折罪
Even if I wanted to do something, I'm unable to do anything about it. 心有余而力不足
begrudge oneself 妄自菲薄
Birth is much but breeding is more 英雄不问出身﻿audition 选秀
pious girl 信女
Buddha 菩萨
strife in the harem 后宫争斗
true beauty 美人坯子
hign-ranking office 高官
the Han Army of the Eight Banners 汉军旗
reutation 脸面
the arts of sewing and embroidery 针线女工
an honorific name 封号
miscarriage 小产
Huanyi Incense 欢宜香
the side door 偏门
the main gate 正门
satin 缎子
the Scarlet Red 一丈红
a humble servant 奴才
prescription 方子
the Imperial Favor Carriage 凤鸾春恩车
integrity 气节
Master 师父
Liar 油嘴
the Gods of Harmony 和合二仙
paper cutouts 剪纸
decree 旨意
the minx 狐媚东西
favor 恩宠
come from a noble family 大家闺秀
nickname 小字
First Attendant Wan 菀常在
Consort Hua 华妃
Second Attendant 答应
the Third Prince 三阿哥
Captain of the Imprial Guard 包衣佐领
Colonel of Jizhou Garrison 济州协领
the Magistrate of Jiangxing County 嘉兴知府
Deputy Magistrate of Songyang County 松阳县丞
Deputy Chief of the Grand Court of Review 大理寺少卿
imperial doctor 御医
an imperial doctor with the means of a humble official 俸禄微薄的御医
eunuch 公公/太监
lead eunuch 首领太监
lead maid 掌事宫女
the palace mistress 主位娘娘
Lady Fucha 富察贵人
Noble Lady 贵人
noble 王爷
Marquess Guo 果郡王
Madam Liu 刘姑姑
the Governor of Shandong 山东总督﻿Chengqian Palace 承乾宫
Yangxin Hall 养心殿
Suiyu Pavilion 碎玉轩
Cold Palace 冷宫
Yikun Palace 翊坤宫
Xianfu Palace 咸福宫
Yanxi Palace 延禧宫
Shunzhen Gate 顺贞门
the Imperial Harem 后宫
the Imperial Household Department
the Imperial Garden 御花园
the Office of Punishment 慎刑司
Qianli Pond 千鲤池﻿Each year and every year, the blossoms return anew. Each year and every year, the bloom of youth does not. 年年岁岁花相似，岁岁年年人不同
to capture the heart of my fated lover and cling together till our hair turns gray. 愿得一人心，白首不分离。
A jade vessel is the symbol of a pure heart. 一片冰心在玉壶
The clothing compeletes the person 先敬罗衣后敬人
Beauties of slim waist in the Chu palace are quite graceful and charming. But their youth and beauty will fade away with the years. 嬛嬛一袅楚宫腰，那更春来香减玉消。
They would rather die on the branch retaining their scent than be scattered on the cold wind. 宁可枝头抱香死,不曾吹落北风中。
Green shoots spring from the shoal, and still I an far from home. 满汀芳草不成归
Raindrops fall on Dongting Lake. Fog shrouds the Imperial Mausoleum. I await my husband, but he has not arrived. The ripples in the lake are not- 雨潇潇兮洞庭，烟霏霏兮黄陵，望夫君兮不来，波渺渺而难升。
Consort Xiang's Complaint 湘妃怨
It's clear that the song is full of worry and sorrow. As if to complain that her lover has not yet returned. 分明曲里愁云雨，似道萧萧郎不归。
I've grow careworn for thinking of my lover. 为伊消得人憔悴﻿先皇the late Emperor
太后the Empress Dowager    
太妃 :Consort Dowager         加上姓氏如:Consort Dowager Shu 舒太妃
皇上His/Your Majesty        如有姓氏:Emperor XuanZong 皇帝唐玄宗
皇后the Empress如有姓氏 :Empress ChunYun 纯元皇后
副后：the Secondary Empress
皇额娘Queen Mother
贵人:Lady +姓氏 如 莞贵人Lady Wan 沈贵人 Lady Shen蕙贵人：Lady Hui 曹贵人：Lady Cao
常在:First Attendant An
答应:Second Attendant An 
嫔妃总称:Concubines(别人这么叫)   丽嫔:Concubine Li 
妃子总称：Consort +姓氏     加上姓氏如华妃:Consort Hua 端妃:Consort Duan 
贵妃：Noble Consort
皇贵妃：Imperial Noble Consort
王爷:Marquess      加上爵位的王爷尊称  如 果郡王 Marquess Guo 敦亲王:Duke Dun
侧福晋The secondary spouse侧福晋：Madam
太子Crown Prince
皇子Imperial child皇子(储)：the Crown Prince
沛国公Viscount Pei
小姐lady
将军:General
太医:imperial doctor  如果有姓氏 如:刘太医 Doctor Liu
太监:eunuchs        如有姓氏  如印公公 Eunuch Yin
首领太监lead eunuch
宫女:maids  
掌事宫女lead maid
奴才:your servant
秀女:audition 
歌姬:a female entertainer
皇叔Royal Uncle
嬷嬷：old maidservant
皇阿玛：Imperial Father
八爷：the Eighth Lord
法师：priest
主位娘娘the palace mistress
刘姑姑Madam Liu
山东总督the Governor of Shandong
包衣佐领Captain of the Imprial Guard
济州协领Colonel of Jizhou Garrison
嘉兴知府the Magistrate of Jiangxing County
松阳县丞Deputy Magistrate of Songyang County 
大理寺少卿Deputy Chief of the Grand Court of Review
太后His/Your Highness
皇后:Empress/ your Highness  
皇上:Your Majesty /Emperor 
娘娘Your Highness/my lady
小主Young mistresses  如果有姓氏: 余小主Miss Yu 
臣妾I
王爷His Lordship
朕our﻿秋海棠begonia
菊花chrysanthemum
红梅red plum
杏花apricot
牡丹：peony 
兰花：orchid 
松针: pine needle 
桃花：peach blossom 
珍珠粉：pearl powder 
莲花Lotus
合欢花Silk tree flower
羊花（羊踯躅，又名黄杜鹃）Azalea flower
山参Wild ginseng
杜若The rabbit-ear iris
艾叶（艾蒿）Mugwort
依兰香Ilang-ilang
蛇床子Cnidium fruit
芭蕉：plantain
红花：safflower﻿某某某~万福金安:……,my blessing and peace be with you/bring to you
愿皇上太后万福金安May blessing and peace be with you
愿皇上万岁万福May Your Majesty enjoy longlife and blessings.
愿太后祥康金安May Your Highness enjoy good health and peace.
皇上吉祥May good fortune be with you.
臣妾参见皇上：I greet Your Majesty. May blessing and peace with you.
给皇上请安I bow to Your Majesty.
愿大清国泰民安May our county thrive in peace.
万岁万岁万万岁Long live the Emperor.
万福I wish you all blessings
对主子说吉祥: I greet you 
请皇上圣安： we bow in respect before Your Majesty
皇后娘娘驾到： her highness the Empress
皇上吉祥，皇后吉祥I greet Your Majesty and Your Highness.
多谢皇上：Thank you , Your Majesty 
多谢娘娘：Thank you , Your Highness 
但凭小主吩咐： at your disposal 
皇上圣明： Your Majesty，you are divinely wise
饶命:spare me 
恭送~~~:we bid you good night/ your servant will see you out  
格杀勿论: kill on sight 
息怒:quiet your anger/please be calm 
降位：demotion
慢走： farewell 
白绫：silk noose
协理六宫：assist sb  manage the harem 
赐座：please take your seats 
传懿旨： deliver decree 
恕罪： forgive me 
求情： intercede for sb 
褫夺封号：deprived of the honorific name 
复位： restore her rank 
恕大不敬之罪：  forgive my impertinence
圣旨：edict
王爷不必客气：No need for such courtesy. Your Grace.
奉天承运 皇帝诏曰：By the grace of heaven, the Emperor hereby decrees…
钦此：Issued by His Imperial Majesty.
登基大典：enthronement ceremony
﻿鸡犬升天the whole family could rise up through one's success
变化无常much changes over time
宽宏大量be kind and generous
明珠暗投be granted an ordinary life when one can live an extraordinary one.
能说会道make a display of one's eloquence
知恩图报know how to show gratitute
国色天香beauty of the nation
口齿伶俐的人clever toungues
耀武扬威swagger around
无以为报receive more than I can repay
栩栩如生vivid
恭敬不如从命It is better to accept deferentially than to decline courteously.
知错能改 善莫大焉A fault confessed is half redressed
进退两难be torn in dilemma
将功折罪make up for mistake
心有余而力不足Even if I wanted to do something, I'm unable to do anything about it.
妄自菲薄begrudge oneself
英雄不问出身Birth is much but breeding is more
一更十分:Between the seventh and the ninth hour 
无计可施:truly at a loss
事从权宜:Do as you see fit 
做贼心虚:A guilty conscience needs no accuser 
眼不见心为净:Let us put them out of sight and out of mind
活要见人死要见尸:catch him alive,or bring his dead body to me
无忧无虑：live a life free from worries
休戚相关：sth and sth are driven by the same forces
血雨腥风：be filled with bloody contests
不择手段：by every means
如履薄冰：it is a walk across thin ice 
化险为夷：barely escaped the cultches of peril
问心无愧：my conscience is clear
得饶人处且饶人：we will forgive her when it is right 
心存仁厚：you are very kind
不尽不实：lie or conceal the truth
寻短见：take one own life
别来无恙：are you well 
主仆一场：master and servant 
背主忘恩：ungrateful and traitor for me
一了百了： eliminate that possibility
来一个算一个： deal with them one by one
轻声细语： mild and gentle 
不忍耳闻：it is an outrage
必定不得好死： fate will bring you to a miserable end
弓弦上的功夫： it requires is a length of bowstring 
兔子急了也会咬人的：a baited cat grows as fierce as a lion 
自己作孽自己遭罪： she must reap what she has sown
从中作梗：put obstacles on my path 
犬马之劳： do my utmost 
多子多福，如意双全： abundant fertility and good fortune
贻笑大方; expose myself to ridicule
雕虫小技： it is a mere performance 
谋财害命： kill for money 
见红： have her menstruation 
招蜂引蝶： draw the attention of men
愧不敢受： unworthy of such praise 
束手无策： have a remedy 
如丧家之犬： become an outcast and wander  like a homeless dog 
心腹之患：  a thorn in our side 
刚正不阿： righteous and tenacious 
一箭双雕： kill two birds with one stone 
恩威并济： balance justice with mercy 
苟延残喘： linger on to your last breath 
生不如死： make your life a living hell 
凡事不怕一万只怕万一Caution is the prudent choice. Some actions cannot be undone.
事后诸葛Your hindsight is useless now.
不在其位不谋其政When you do not hold an office, you need not consider policy.
不知学良禽择佳木而栖I should have chosen a better master. To my chagrin, I chose wrongly.
白璧微瑕It would be as a slight flaw in pure white jade.
唯君命是从Your Majesty, I am at your command.
人为刀俎我为鱼肉I was subjected to cruel oppression.
时过境迁Time has passed and circumstances have changed.
树倒猢狲散Even rats will abandon a sinking ship.
打草惊蛇Rash action to alert the enemy.
借花献佛We will use her ploy to our advantage.
福兮祸所依in misfortune lies in the seed of happiness
仗势欺人 Be domineering
二月二龙抬头，大仓满，小仓流when the dragon raises its head, abundant harvests of crops and promised ahead
得陇望蜀（与语境联系，避免直译显得突兀，让人困惑）You showed insatiable desire and seduced His Majesty once again
至情至性Be of a passionate nature
一朝一夕In a short span of time
立竿见影Obtain immediate results
光彩照人Be brightened
东施效颦Follow her example
日久生情Proximity breeds fondness
青梅竹马Be childhood playmates
胡言乱语Spout nonsense
若要人不知除非己莫为The best way to conceal a misdeed is not to commit one in the first place.
不入虎穴焉得虎子A tiger cub cannot be caught without entering the tiger’s lair.
扑风追影Act upon hearsay and rumors
性命攸关Be on the verge of death
正如流沙逝于掌心：Like the sand that slips through your fingers
佛口蛇心：Honeyed words but evil intent.﻿选秀audition
信女pious girl
菩萨Buddha
后宫争斗strife in the harem
美人坯子true beauty
高官hign-ranking office
汉军旗the Han Army of the Eight Banners
脸面reutation
针线女工the arts of sewing and embroidery
封号an honorific name
小产miscarriage
欢宜香Huanyi Incense
偏门the side door
正门the main gate
缎子satin
一丈红the Scarlet Red
奴才a humble servant
方子prescription
凤鸾春恩车the Imperial Favor Carriage
气节integrity
师父Master
油嘴Liar
和合二仙the Gods of Harmony
剪纸paper cutouts
旨意decree
狐媚东西the minx
恩宠favor
大家闺秀come from a noble family
小字nickname
穴位：acupuncture
合谷穴：Hegu Point
长相思琴：zither of endless longing 
长相守：eternal faithfulness
头风：severe headaches
敌军流兵：deserters of the enemy 
军粮： military provisions 
香囊： sachet 
侍卫：sentry
毒妇：vile wench
朝中重臣：high-ranking official
乌拉那拉氏：Ula Nara clan
庶人：the status of a commoner
节哀：contain his grief
龙椅：throne﻿承乾宫Chengqian Palace
翊坤宫Yikun Palace
冷宫Cold Palace
咸福宫Xianfu Palace
延禧宫Yanxi Palace
后宫the Imperial Harem
钟粹宫：Zhongcui Palace
启祥宫：Qixiang  Palace
景仁宫：Jingren  Palace
永寿宫Yongshou Palace
东六宫： the eastern six palaces
西六宫： the western six palaces
春禧殿Chunxi Hall
养心殿Yangxin Hall
宝华殿: Baohua Temple
碧桐书院： Bitong Study Hall 
存菊堂：Cunju Hall 
凝晖堂Ninghui Hall
碎玉轩Suiyu Pavilion
清凉阁His Pavilion不翻译清凉阁，而是翻译他的，指果郡王的）
顺贞门Shunzhen Gate
御花园the Imperial Garden
百骏园Baijun Garden
圆明园： Yuanming Palace
慎刑司the Office of Punishment
内务府：the Imperial Household Department
宗人府：Imperial Clan Court
粘竿处：the Cicada Removal Service
太医院： the Imperial Medical Bureau
雁鸣关：Yanming Pass
桐花台：Tung Blossom Terrace
千鲤池Qianli Pond
库房：warehouse﻿年年岁岁花相似，岁岁年年人不同Each year and every year, the blossoms return anew. Each year and every year, the bloom of youth does not. 
愿得一人心，白首不分离。to capture the heart of my fated lover and cling together till our hair turns gray.
一片冰心在玉壶A jade vessel is the symbol of a pure heart.
先敬罗衣后敬人The clothing compeletes the person
嬛嬛一袅楚宫腰，那更春来香减玉消。Beauties of slim waist in the Chu palace are quite graceful and charming. But their youth and beauty will fade away with the years.
宁可枝头抱香死,不曾吹落北风中。They would rather die on the branch retaining their scent than be scattered on the cold wind.
满汀芳草不成归Green shoots spring from the shoal, and still I an far from home.
雨潇潇兮洞庭，烟霏霏兮黄陵，望夫君兮不来，波渺渺而难升。Raindrops fall on Dongting Lake. Fog shrouds the Imperial Mausoleum. I await my husband, but he has not arrived. The ripples in the lake are not-
分明曲里愁云雨，似道萧萧郎不归。It's clear that the song is full of worry and sorrow. As if to complain that her lover has not yet returned.
为伊消得人憔悴I've grow careworn for thinking of my lover.
劝君莫惜金缕衣:I advice you not to convert golden embroidered garment
有花堪折直须折:One must pick a flower at the prime of its bloom
莫待无花空折枝:Do not wait until the bloosoms fade and fall
凤凰于飞，和鸣铿锵：A pair of phoenixes on the wing glide in perfect harmony.
螳螂捕蝉，黄雀在后：When the shepherds quarrel,the wolf has a winning hand.
己所不欲勿施于人: Do not impose on others what you do not wish for yourself.
江南可采莲，莲叶何田田：Lotus blossoms abound to be picked to the south of the Yangtze
美人若如斯，何不早入怀： Such a beauty as she should be held in my arms at first sight.
旧梦依稀，往事迷离： Dreams are vague the past, shrouded in mist
春花秋月里： Int the beauty of autumn and spring 
望长相思，望长相守： I long for you endlessly, to be eternally faithful
却空留琴与笛：But only the zither and the flute remain
以情相悦，以心相许： We are meant for each other
以身相偎依： Our souls remain together
愿勿相忘，愿勿相负： forget me not, betray me not
看命运嘲弄，造化游戏： Fate has grieved us
终于随乱红飞花去： Drifted away like fallen leaves
期盼明月，期盼朝阳： I hope for the rising moon and the morning sun
期盼春风浴： For the caress of the warm spring breeze
凤凰于飞，翙翙其羽： Like a pair of phoenixes, we shall wing our ways
远去无痕迹： Far away without a trace
掌上珊瑚怜不得，却教移作向阳花。（吴伟业《古意》）The coral in my palm I may not keep, for it has become the flower of the royal palace
江南可采莲Lotus blossoms abound to be picked to the south of the Yangtze 
小山重叠金明灭，鬓云欲度香腮雪。懒起画蛾眉，弄妆梳洗迟。照花前后镜，花面交相映。新帖绣罗襦，双双金鹧鸪。Light and shade upon her be-screen’s peaks. Her hair drifts cloud-like across rosy cheeks.Idly she rises to paint her brows. Dallying with her makeup and hair. Admiring herself front and back in the mirror. Her face rivals blossoms in beauty. Embroidered on the silken vest she wears. Golden partridges fly in pairs.
花好月圆人长久：Flowers in blossom and the full moon, symbols of a conjugal bliss which endures
春风不度玉门关：The breezes of spring have not yet arrived at Yumen Pass
君要臣死臣不得不死：if the Emperor orders an official to die, he has no choice but to do so.
但愿人长久：Yearning for a life long in years, we share the same moonlight even a thousand miles apart.
终身所约，永结为好：Let us commit ourselves to one another for life, two souls eternally united.
琴瑟在御，岁月静好：If only we may live in harmonious matrimony, our days filled with peace and joy.
喜怒不形于色 心事勿让人知 Don’t show your emotions on your face and don’t let others know your thoughts.
惊鸿舞曲子翻译: 翩若惊鸿，婉若游龙,荣曜秋菊,华茂春松,仿佛兮若轻云之蔽日,飘摇兮若流风之回雪，远而望之，皎若太阳开朝霞。Dance light like a startled wild goose,Move gracefully like a soaring dragon.More glorious than the chrysanthemums of autumn.More majestic than the pines of spring.Just like the moon mantled in light clouds.Swinging like a snowflake swirling in the blowing breeze.Gazing from a distance,As bright as the sun rising above the rosy clouds of dawn.20151024