鸡犬升天the whole family could rise up through one's success
变化无常much changes over time
宽宏大量be kind and generous
明珠暗投be granted an ordinary life when one can live an extraordinary one.
能说会道make a display of one's eloquence
知恩图报know how to show gratitute
国色天香beauty of the nation
口齿伶俐的人clever toungues
耀武扬威swagger around
无以为报receive more than I can repay
栩栩如生vivid
恭敬不如从命It is better to accept deferentially than to decline courteously.
知错能改 善莫大焉A fault confessed is half redressed
进退两难be torn in dilemma
将功折罪make up for mistake
心有余而力不足Even if I wanted to do something, I'm unable to do anything about it.
妄自菲薄begrudge oneself
英雄不问出身Birth is much but breeding is more
一更十分:Between the seventh and the ninth hour 
无计可施:truly at a loss
事从权宜:Do as you see fit 
做贼心虚:A guilty conscience needs no accuser 
眼不见心为净:Let us put them out of sight and out of mind
活要见人死要见尸:catch him alive,or bring his dead body to me
无忧无虑：live a life free from worries
休戚相关：sth and sth are driven by the same forces
血雨腥风：be filled with bloody contests
不择手段：by every means
如履薄冰：it is a walk across thin ice 
化险为夷：barely escaped the cultches of peril
问心无愧：my conscience is clear
得饶人处且饶人：we will forgive her when it is right 
心存仁厚：you are very kind
不尽不实：lie or conceal the truth
寻短见：take one own life
别来无恙：are you well 
主仆一场：master and servant 
背主忘恩：ungrateful and traitor for me
一了百了： eliminate that possibility
来一个算一个： deal with them one by one
轻声细语： mild and gentle 
不忍耳闻：it is an outrage
必定不得好死： fate will bring you to a miserable end
弓弦上的功夫： it requires is a length of bowstring 
兔子急了也会咬人的：a baited cat grows as fierce as a lion 
自己作孽自己遭罪： she must reap what she has sown
从中作梗：put obstacles on my path 
犬马之劳： do my utmost 
多子多福，如意双全： abundant fertility and good fortune
贻笑大方; expose myself to ridicule
雕虫小技： it is a mere performance 
谋财害命： kill for money 
见红： have her menstruation 
招蜂引蝶： draw the attention of men
愧不敢受： unworthy of such praise 
束手无策： have a remedy 
如丧家之犬： become an outcast and wander  like a homeless dog 
心腹之患：  a thorn in our side 
刚正不阿： righteous and tenacious 
一箭双雕： kill two birds with one stone 
恩威并济： balance justice with mercy 
苟延残喘： linger on to your last breath 
生不如死： make your life a living hell 
凡事不怕一万只怕万一Caution is the prudent choice. Some actions cannot be undone.
事后诸葛Your hindsight is useless now.
不在其位不谋其政When you do not hold an office, you need not consider policy.
不知学良禽择佳木而栖I should have chosen a better master. To my chagrin, I chose wrongly.
白璧微瑕It would be as a slight flaw in pure white jade.
唯君命是从Your Majesty, I am at your command.
人为刀俎我为鱼肉I was subjected to cruel oppression.
时过境迁Time has passed and circumstances have changed.
树倒猢狲散Even rats will abandon a sinking ship.
打草惊蛇Rash action to alert the enemy.
借花献佛We will use her ploy to our advantage.
福兮祸所依in misfortune lies in the seed of happiness
仗势欺人 Be domineering
二月二龙抬头，大仓满，小仓流when the dragon raises its head, abundant harvests of crops and promised ahead
得陇望蜀（与语境联系，避免直译显得突兀，让人困惑）You showed insatiable desire and seduced His Majesty once again
至情至性Be of a passionate nature
一朝一夕In a short span of time
立竿见影Obtain immediate results
光彩照人Be brightened
东施效颦Follow her example
日久生情Proximity breeds fondness
青梅竹马Be childhood playmates
胡言乱语Spout nonsense
若要人不知除非己莫为The best way to conceal a misdeed is not to commit one in the first place.
不入虎穴焉得虎子A tiger cub cannot be caught without entering the tiger’s lair.
扑风追影Act upon hearsay and rumors
性命攸关Be on the verge of death
正如流沙逝于掌心：Like the sand that slips through your fingers
佛口蛇心：Honeyed words but evil intent.