年年岁岁花相似，岁岁年年人不同Each year and every year, the blossoms return anew. Each year and every year, the bloom of youth does not. 
愿得一人心，白首不分离。to capture the heart of my fated lover and cling together till our hair turns gray.
一片冰心在玉壶A jade vessel is the symbol of a pure heart.
先敬罗衣后敬人The clothing compeletes the person
嬛嬛一袅楚宫腰，那更春来香减玉消。Beauties of slim waist in the Chu palace are quite graceful and charming. But their youth and beauty will fade away with the years.
宁可枝头抱香死,不曾吹落北风中。They would rather die on the branch retaining their scent than be scattered on the cold wind.
满汀芳草不成归Green shoots spring from the shoal, and still I an far from home.
雨潇潇兮洞庭，烟霏霏兮黄陵，望夫君兮不来，波渺渺而难升。Raindrops fall on Dongting Lake. Fog shrouds the Imperial Mausoleum. I await my husband, but he has not arrived. The ripples in the lake are not-
分明曲里愁云雨，似道萧萧郎不归。It's clear that the song is full of worry and sorrow. As if to complain that her lover has not yet returned.
为伊消得人憔悴I've grow careworn for thinking of my lover.
劝君莫惜金缕衣:I advice you not to convert golden embroidered garment
有花堪折直须折:One must pick a flower at the prime of its bloom
莫待无花空折枝:Do not wait until the bloosoms fade and fall
凤凰于飞，和鸣铿锵：A pair of phoenixes on the wing glide in perfect harmony.
螳螂捕蝉，黄雀在后：When the shepherds quarrel,the wolf has a winning hand.
己所不欲勿施于人: Do not impose on others what you do not wish for yourself.
江南可采莲，莲叶何田田：Lotus blossoms abound to be picked to the south of the Yangtze
美人若如斯，何不早入怀： Such a beauty as she should be held in my arms at first sight.
旧梦依稀，往事迷离： Dreams are vague the past, shrouded in mist
春花秋月里： Int the beauty of autumn and spring 
望长相思，望长相守： I long for you endlessly, to be eternally faithful
却空留琴与笛：But only the zither and the flute remain
以情相悦，以心相许： We are meant for each other
以身相偎依： Our souls remain together
愿勿相忘，愿勿相负： forget me not, betray me not
看命运嘲弄，造化游戏： Fate has grieved us
终于随乱红飞花去： Drifted away like fallen leaves
期盼明月，期盼朝阳： I hope for the rising moon and the morning sun
期盼春风浴： For the caress of the warm spring breeze
凤凰于飞，翙翙其羽： Like a pair of phoenixes, we shall wing our ways
远去无痕迹： Far away without a trace
掌上珊瑚怜不得，却教移作向阳花。（吴伟业《古意》）The coral in my palm I may not keep, for it has become the flower of the royal palace
江南可采莲Lotus blossoms abound to be picked to the south of the Yangtze 
小山重叠金明灭，鬓云欲度香腮雪。懒起画蛾眉，弄妆梳洗迟。照花前后镜，花面交相映。新帖绣罗襦，双双金鹧鸪。Light and shade upon her be-screen’s peaks. Her hair drifts cloud-like across rosy cheeks.Idly she rises to paint her brows. Dallying with her makeup and hair. Admiring herself front and back in the mirror. Her face rivals blossoms in beauty. Embroidered on the silken vest she wears. Golden partridges fly in pairs.
花好月圆人长久：Flowers in blossom and the full moon, symbols of a conjugal bliss which endures
春风不度玉门关：The breezes of spring have not yet arrived at Yumen Pass
君要臣死臣不得不死：if the Emperor orders an official to die, he has no choice but to do so.
但愿人长久：Yearning for a life long in years, we share the same moonlight even a thousand miles apart.
终身所约，永结为好：Let us commit ourselves to one another for life, two souls eternally united.
琴瑟在御，岁月静好：If only we may live in harmonious matrimony, our days filled with peace and joy.
喜怒不形于色 心事勿让人知 Don’t show your emotions on your face and don’t let others know your thoughts.
惊鸿舞曲子翻译: 翩若惊鸿，婉若游龙,荣曜秋菊,华茂春松,仿佛兮若轻云之蔽日,飘摇兮若流风之回雪，远而望之，皎若太阳开朝霞。Dance light like a startled wild goose,Move gracefully like a soaring dragon.More glorious than the chrysanthemums of autumn.More majestic than the pines of spring.Just like the moon mantled in light clouds.Swinging like a snowflake swirling in the blowing breeze.Gazing from a distance,As bright as the sun rising above the rosy clouds of dawn.